\documentclass[12pt]{article}
\input{physics1}
\begin{document}

\section*{NYU Physics I---Problem Set 2}

Due Tuesday 2018 September 20 at the beginning of lecture.

\paragraph{Problem~\theproblem:}\refstepcounter{problem}%
\textsl{(a)} Look up the masses and sizes of neutral atoms---or a
scaling law for the sizes of the outer electron shell for neutral
atoms---and compute the densities (in $\kg\,\m^{-3}$) of a Hydrogen
atom, an Oxygen atom, an Iron atom, and a Uranium atom. Compare the
last two to the densities of iron and uranium in metallic form.

\textsl{(b)} Compute (or look up!), using the ideal gas law, the
density of diatomic Nitrogen gas at ``standard temperature and
pressure''. How close do you think this estimate will be to the
density of air at STP?

\paragraph{Problem~\theproblem:}\refstepcounter{problem}%
Re-do the numerical integration worksheet problem from recitation this
week (download it from the course web site if you have forgotten), but
this time do it with a computer spreadsheet and use a time resolution
($\Delta t$) of $0.01\,\s$.  No need to hand in the whole spreadsheet,
or the answers to all the questions, but hand in a graph (plotted by
your spreadsheet program) of the position as a function of time for
the duration $0<t<2\,\s$.  Make sure your axes are clearly labeled and
``calibrated'' in units of m and s.

\paragraph{Problem~\theproblem}\refstepcounter{problem}%
Now do something similar to the above, but analytically.  Consider a
stone thrown at $t=0$ precisely upwards (in the $y$ direction, for
definiteness) at $1.5\,\mps$, with an initial position (launch point)
at $y=0$.  Ignore air resistance!  Make very careful plots of the
vertical position $y$, the vertical velocity $v_y$, and the vertical
acceleration $a_y$ of the stone as a function of time for the duration
$0<t<0.4\,\s$.  Carefully label the time and $y$-position of
the peak of the trajectory (the highest point) in all three curves,
and the time at which the trajectory passes back through $y=0$, if
that ever happens. Be very careful to include units with all of your
numbers and labels!

\paragraph{Problem~\theproblem}\refstepcounter{problem}%
When an airplane turns a corner, it banks (tilts). When the plane is
flown correctly, the tangent (yes, the trig function ``tan'') of this
tilt angle is set by the ratio of the transverse acceleration
(centripetal acceleration) to the acceleration due to gravity.

\textsl{(a)} If you see a commercial jet aircraft tilted at $30\,\deg$
because it is turning, about what do you think the radius of the turn
is? Clearly state your assumptions! You might have to look up or
estimate the speed at which planes fly. Does your answer seem
reasonable given what you know about planes and travel?

\textsl{(b)} Draw a free-body diagram for the turning airplane,
showing the gravitational force, the lift force from the wings, the
thrust force from the engines, and the drag force from air resistance.
These are the \emph{only} four forces you need to have to explain
the turning airplane.

\end{document}
